[NET-5916] docs: Add locality examples and troubleshooting (#19605)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/connect/manage-traffic/route-to-local-upstreams.mdx

<EnterpriseAlert> This feature is available in Consul Enterprise. </EnterpriseAlert>

> !> **Warning**: Locality-aware routing is an advanced feature that may adversely impact service capacity if used incorrectly. By default, this feature routes 100% of traffic to the most local set of service instances, and failover only occurs when there are no healthy instances available in the most local set. You should only follow these instructions when each set of upstream instances (within the same zone, within the same region, and non-local) have enough capacity to handle requests from downstream service instances in their respective zone(s).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Locality-aware routing is an advanced feature that may adversely impact service capacity if used incorrectly. By default, Consul routes all traffic to the nearest set of service instances and only fails over when no healthy instances are available in the nearest set. You should only follow these instructions when each set of external upstream instances within the same zone and region have enough capacity to handle requests from downstream service instances in their respective zones.
```
There should only be one callout box per section. We don't have a Requirements section on this page, but this is where I would put this information because we are telling people that "enough capacity to handle requests . . ." is a requirement. Even there, this does not rise to the level of needing a red warning callout, which is reserved for warning people about potentially causing catastrophic issues.

Author: Ok. It's possible that improperly using this feature would cause existing service instance capacity to become insufficient for handling traffic - immediately or during failover. That could cause partial or total outages in the affected services, which seemed worth calling out. If that doesn't quite meet the bar, I can remove the warning callout.

> We don't have a Requirements section on this page, but this is where I would put this information because we are telling people that "enough capacity to handle requests . . ." is a requirement

Should we add a requirements section, and if so would that just be adding a heading at the current doc position?

Author: I moved this below `Introduction` and added a `Requirements` heading - let me know if that looks correct to you

> -> **Note**: It is possible to adjust the load balancing and failover behavior for this feature globally or per-service via the [Property Override Envoy extension](/consul/docs/connect/proxies/envoy-extensions/usage/property-override) by modifying [`overprovisioning_factor`](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/endpoint/v3/endpoint.proto#config-endpoint-v3-clusterloadassignment) and [outlier detection](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/cluster/v3/outlier_detection.proto#config-cluster-v3-outlierdetection) configuration. By default, Consul sets `overprovisioning_factor` to `100000` (enforcing "total" failover) and `max_ejection_percent` to `100`. Please familiarize with Envoy documentation on these fields before attempting to modify them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This is in the wrong section

Author: Ok - where do you think it would best fit?

PrioritizeByLocality = {
    Mode = "failover"
}
```
</CodeBlockConfig>
</Tab>

<Tab heading="JSON" group="json">
<CodeBlockConfig filename="api-resolver.json">

```json
{
  "kind": "service-resolver",
  "name": "api",
  "prioritizeByLocality": {
    "mode": "failover"
  }
}
```
</CodeBlockConfig>
</Tab>
<Tab heading="Kubernetes" group="kubernetes">
<CodeBlockConfig filename="api-resolver.yaml">

```yaml
apiversion: consul.hashicorp.com/v1alpha1
kind: ServiceResolver
metadata:
  name: api
spec:
  prioritizeByLocality:
    mode: failover
```

</CodeBlockConfig>
</Tab>
</Tabs>

Apply the configuration by either running the [`consul config write` CLI command](/consul/commands/config/write), applying the Kubernetes CRD, or calling the [`/config` HTTP API endpoint](/consul/api-docs/config).

<Tabs>
<Tab heading="Consul CLI" group="cli">

  ```shell-session
  $ consul config write api-resolver.hcl
  ```

</Tab>

<Tab heading="Kubernetes" group="k8s">

  ```shell-session
  $ kubectl apply -f api-resolver.yaml
  ```

</Tab>
<Tab heading="HTTP API" group="api">

  ```shell-session
  $ curl --request PUT --data @api-resolver.hcl http://127.0.0.1:8500/v1/config
  ```

</Tab>
</Tabs>

> ### Explicit locality configuration on Kubernetes test clusters
> 
> If you are testing this feature with a local Kubernetes cluster (or in an environment where `topology.kubernetes.io` labels are not set), it is possible to explicitly provide each node's locality using `kubectl label`:
> 
> ```shell-session
> kubectl label node $K8S_NODE topology.kubernetes.io/region="us-east-1" topology.kubernetes.io/zone="us-east-1a"
> ```
> 
> After setting these values, you should see subsequent service and proxy registrations in your cluster inherit the values from their local Kubernetes node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configure locality on Kubernetes test clusters explicitly

You can explicitly configure locality for each Kubernetes node If you are testing locality-aware routing with a local Kubernetes cluster or in an environment where `topology.kubernetes.io` labels are not set. Run the `kubectl label node` command specify the locality as arguments. The following example specifies the `us-east-1` region and `us-east-1a` zone for the node:

```shell-session
kubectl label node $K8S_NODE topology.kubernetes.io/region="us-east-1" topology.kubernetes.io/zone="us-east-1a"
```

After setting these values, subsequent service and proxy registrations in your cluster inherit the values from their local Kubernetes node.
```
I was trying to keep the consistent headings to start with "Configure . . .", but change it back if we need to emphasize that this is an explicit operation.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Adjust load balancing and failover behavior

You can adjust the global or per-service load balancing and failover behaviors of routes between local service instances by apply the property override Envoy extension. The property override extension allows you to set and remove individual properties on the Envoy resources Consul generates. Refer to [Configure Envoy proxy properties](/consul/docs/connect/proxies/envoy-extensions/usage/property-override) for additional information.

1. Add the `EnvoyExtensions` configuration block to the service defaults or proxy defaults configuration entry.
1. Configure the following settings  in the `EnvoyExtensions` configuration:
   -  [`overprovisioning_factor`](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/endpoint/v3/endpoint.proto#config-endpoint-v3-clusterloadassignment) 
   - [outlier detection](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/cluster/v3/outlier_detection.proto#config-cluster-v3-outlierdetection) configuration. By default, Consul sets `overprovisioning_factor` to `100000`, which enforces total failover, and `max_ejection_percent` to `100`. Refer to the Envoy documentation about these fields before attempting to modify them.
1. Apply the configuration. Refer to [Apply the configuration entry](/consul/docs/connect/proxies/envoy-extensions/usage/property-override#apply-the-configuration-entry) for details. 
```
I wasn't sure how to write the steps for setting the overprovisioning factor and outlier detection, so that probably needs more detail. 

We should also consider just moving this section to the extension documentation and linking to it  from here. It seems to me that the actions we are describing are more a function of the extension than setting the locality for routes.

Author: > I wasn't sure how to write the steps for setting the overprovisioning factor and outlier detection, so that probably needs more detail.

I can help w/ that if we think an explicit example is needed, though [this](https://developer.hashicorp.com/consul/docs/connect/proxies/envoy-extensions/configuration/property-override#update-multiple-values-in-a-message-field) one is close already. Given this is even more into custom configuration territory, my thought was to maybe wait and see if we get requests for more detail as confirmation that it's something folks want to do. I could be wrong about that.

> We should also consider just moving this section to the extension documentation and linking to it from here. It seems to me that the actions we are describing are more a function of the extension than setting the locality for routes.

I could see that. My thinking was the extension is a general solution for potentially many needs, and the actions described are more specific to this feature, but use the extension to accomplish them. I'm open to adding an example there instead.

Author: Added your suggestion. I moved the default values callout to below the bullets since they apply to both properties.

```json
{
  "@type": "type.googleapis.com/envoy.config.endpoint.v3.ClusterLoadAssignment",
  "cluster_name": "web.default.dc1.internal.161d7b5a-bb5f-379c-7d5a-1fc7504f95da.consul",
  "endpoints": [
    {
      "lb_endpoints": [
        {
          "endpoint": {
            "address": {
              "socket_address": {
                "address": "10.42.2.6",
                "port_value": 20000

>               }
>             },
>             "health_check_config": {}
>           },
>           ...
>         },
>         ...
>       ],
>       "locality": {}
>     },
>     {
>       "lb_endpoints": [
>         {
>           "endpoint": {
>             "address": {
>               "socket_address": {
>                 "address": "10.42.3.6",
>                 "port_value": 20000
>               }
>             },
>             "health_check_config": {}
>           },
>           ...
>         },
>         ...
>       ],
>       "locality": {},
>       "priority": 1
>     },
>     {
>       "lb_endpoints": [
>         {
>           "endpoint": {
>             "address": {
>               "socket_address": {
>                 "address": "10.42.0.6",
>                 "port_value": 20000
>               }
>             },
>             "health_check_config": {}
>           },
>           ...
>         },
>         ...
>       ],
>       "locality": {},
>       "priority": 2
>     }
>   ],
>   ...
> }
> ```
> 
> To force a failover for testing purposes, scale the upstream service instances in the downstream's local zone (or region, if no local zone instances are avaiable) to zero.
> 
> <Tip>
> Keep in mind the following:
>   - Priority for failover is in ascending order, starting with `0`. Priority `0` (the "highest" priority) will not be explicitly visible in xDS output, since it is the default value for that field.
>   - Once Envoy failover configuration is in place, the specific timing of failover is determined by the downstream Envoy proxy, not Consul. Consul health status may not correspond 1-1 with Envoy's failover behavior, which is also dependent on outlier detection.
> </Tip>

Reviewer: All of this is a new topic and needs to be placed into its own page. 

```suggestion
## Observing routing changes

This feature relies on configuring Envoy's built-in [`overprovisioning_factor`](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/endpoint/v3/endpoint.proto#config-endpoint-v3-clusterloadassignment) and [outlier detection](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/cluster/v3/outlier_detection.proto#config-cluster-v3-outlierdetection) configuration to enforce failover behavior. Because Envoy does not provide granular metrics specific to failover or endpoint traffic within a cluster, the effects of enabling this feature are best observed using external observability tools that expose network traffic within your environment. _The immediate effect of enabling the feature should be the local routing of traffic from each downstream service instance to the most-local set of healthy upstream instances available._

To verify locality-aware routing and failover configuration is in place, you can inspect Envoy's xDS config dump for a downstream proxy. Refer to the [consul-k8s CLI docs](https://developer.hashicorp.com/consul/docs/k8s/k8s-cli#proxy-read) for details on how to obtain this on Kubernetes; for other workloads, use the Envoy [admin interface](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/operations/admin) and ensure that you [include EDS](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/operations/admin#get--config_dump?include_eds). Inspect the [priority](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/intro/arch_overview/upstream/load_balancing/priority#arch-overview-load-balancing-priority-levels) on each set of endpoints under the upstream `ClusterLoadAssignment` in the `EndpointsConfigDump`. Alternatively, the same priorities should be visibile within the output of the [`/clusters?format=json`](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/operations/admin#get--clusters?format=json) admin endpoint.

```json
{
  "@type": "type.googleapis.com/envoy.config.endpoint.v3.ClusterLoadAssignment",
  "cluster_name": "web.default.dc1.internal.161d7b5a-bb5f-379c-7d5a-1fc7504f95da.consul",
  "endpoints": [
    {
      "lb_endpoints": [
        {
          "endpoint": {
            "address": {
              "socket_address": {
                "address": "10.42.2.6",
                "port_value": 20000
              }
            },
            "health_check_config": {}
          },
          ...
        },
        ...
      ],
      "locality": {}
    },
    {
      "lb_endpoints": [
        {
          "endpoint": {
            "address": {
              "socket_address": {
                "address": "10.42.3.6",
                "port_value": 20000
              }
            },
            "health_check_config": {}
          },
          ...
        },
        ...
      ],
      "locality": {},
      "priority": 1
    },
    {
      "lb_endpoints": [
        {
          "endpoint": {
            "address": {
              "socket_address": {
                "address": "10.42.0.6",
                "port_value": 20000
              }
            },
            "health_check_config": {}
          },
          ...
        },
        ...
      ],
      "locality": {},
      "priority": 2
    }
  ],
  ...
}
```

To force a failover for testing purposes, scale the upstream service instances in the downstream's local zone (or region, if no local zone instances are avaiable) to zero.

<Tip>
Keep in mind the following:
  - Priority for failover is in ascending order, starting with `0`. Priority `0` (the "highest" priority) will not be explicitly visible in xDS output, since it is the default value for that field.
  - Once Envoy failover configuration is in place, the specific timing of failover is determined by the downstream Envoy proxy, not Consul. Consul health status may not correspond 1-1 with Envoy's failover behavior, which is also dependent on outlier detection.
</Tip>
```

Author: Where would we want to put that separate topic? This is highly specific to the feature, so are you suggesting we break it out and link to it just to control content length?

(I can't tell what's being suggested to change because of the nested ``` marks - it looks like maybe there isn't a suggestion for this one and it was primarily a comment above moving.)

## Troubleshooting

> If you do not see the expected priorities, verify that your locality configuration is in place and that you have enabled `PrioritizeByLocality` in your proxy defaults or service resolver. If `PrioritizeByLocality` is enabled but the local proxy lacks locality configuration, Consul will emit a warning log to indicate that the policy could not be applied:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you do not see the expected priorities, verify that locality is configured in the Consul agent and that `PrioritizeByLocality` is enabled in your proxy defaults or service resolver configuration entry. When `PrioritizeByLocality` is enabled but the local proxy lacks locality configuration, Consul emits a warning log to indicate that the policy could not be applied:
```
We should copy or move this to the Common Error Messages page: https://developer.hashicorp.com/consul/docs/troubleshoot/common-errors

Author: Ah, I hadn't considered that page. I don't think I'd expect this error to be common FWIW, but happy to add it there if it's meant to be a catch-all.

I think it's more likely that a user would notice this error after being told by the feature docs to look for it as a troubleshooting step, rather than seeing it and trying to figure out what to do next, so I'd lean toward at least calling it out here.

Author: Fixed per the above suggestion - LMK what you think re: adding to common errors.

  - Consul prioritizes failovers in ascending order starting with `0`. The highest priority, `0`, is not explicitly visible in xDS output. This is because `0` is the default value for that field.
  - After Envoy failover configuration is in place, the specific timing of failover is determined by the downstream Envoy proxy, not Consul. Consul health status may not directly correspond to Envoy's failover behavior, which is also dependent on outlier detection.

Refer to [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting) if you do not observe the expected behavior.

## Adjust load balancing and failover behavior

You can adjust the global or per-service load balancing and failover behaviors by applying the property override Envoy extension. The property override extension allows you to set and remove individual properties on the Envoy resources Consul generates. Refer to [Configure Envoy proxy properties](/consul/docs/connect/proxies/envoy-extensions/usage/property-override) for additional information.

1. Add the `EnvoyExtensions` configuration block to the service defaults or proxy defaults configuration entry.
1. Configure the following settings  in the `EnvoyExtensions` configuration:

> - [`overprovisioning_factor`](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/endpoint/v3/endpoint.proto#config-endpoint-v3-clusterloadassignment)
> - [outlier detection](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/cluster/v3/outlier_detection.proto#config-cluster-v3-outlierdetection) configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [`overprovisioning_factor`](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/endpoint/v3/endpoint.proto#config-endpoint-v3-clusterloadassignment)
    - [outlier detection](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/cluster/v3/outlier_detection.proto#config-cluster-v3-outlierdetection) configuration.
```
This should fix the formatting
